Cds 57016 expression engine (#2009)
harness/developer-hub: docs/platform/12_Variables-and-Expressions/expression-v2.md

* Comprehensive execution JSON: You can access the execution JSON for all stages or individual steps. This JSON contains detailed information about inputs and outputs for each step within the stage. This lets you analyze and troubleshoot workflows effectively and extract the required information easily.
* Flexible JSON parsing: You can utilize any JSON parsing tool of your choice. This gives you the freedom to parse the execution JSON based on your preferred methods and extract the necessary information as per your requirements.
* JEXL script support: This enhancement enables you to leverage the full power and flexibility of JEXL expressions, overcoming the limitations of the previous framework. You can now write complex expressions and customize the evaluation process to meet specific needs.

## Limitations

If your step inputs or parameters size is greater than 4 KB then it cannot be part of your expanded JSON. This is to safeguard our system.

## Writing expressions using JSON

> Here's how the execution JSON looks like: 

Author: ```suggestion
Here's an example execution JSON: 
```

> Here's how the execution JSON looks like: 

Author: ```suggestion
Here's an example execution JSON: 
```
```suggestion
Let's see how to extract data from the following sample execution JSON:
```

> Here's how the execution JSON looks like: 

Author: ```suggestion
Let's see how to extract data from the following sample Execution JSON: 
```

                  "name": "ShellScript_1",
                  "timeout": "10m",
                  "type": "ShellScript",
                  "spec": {
                    "outputVariables": {},
                    "environmentVariables": {},
                    "secretOutputVariables": [],
                    "shell": "Bash",
                    "source": {
                      "type": "Inline",
                      "spec": {
                        "script": "t=\"[]\"\necho $t"
                      }
                    },
                    "onDelegate": true
                  },
                  "rollbackParameters": {
                    "strategy": "UNKNOWN",
                    "strategyToUuid": {
                      "STAGE_ROLLBACK": "A31KTBUdTja1KanfnDrtGQ_combinedRollback"
                    },
                    "applicableFailureTypes": []
                  }
                },
                "status": "SUCCEEDED",
                "outcome": {
                  "output": {
                    "outputVariables": {}
                  }
                }
              }
            }
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

> Retrieve specific chunks of data in the above JSON by locating the corresponding path. For instance, to access the status of a combination within the matrix named cStage1, use the following expression: 

Author: ```suggestion
You can retrieve specific chunks of data from the sample JSON above by locating the corresponding path. For example, to access the status of a combination within the matrix named cStage1, use the following expression: 
```

* Comprehensive execution JSON: You can access the execution JSON for all stages or individual steps. This JSON contains detailed information about inputs and outputs for each step within the stage. This lets you analyze and troubleshoot workflows effectively and extract the required information easily.
* Flexible JSON parsing: You can utilize any JSON parsing tool of your choice. This gives you the freedom to parse the execution JSON based on your preferred methods and extract the necessary information as per your requirements.
* JEXL script support: This enhancement enables you to leverage the full power and flexibility of JEXL expressions, overcoming the limitations of the previous framework. You can now write complex expressions and customize the evaluation process to meet specific needs.

## Limitations

If your step inputs or parameters size is greater than 4 KB, then it cannot be part of your expanded JSON. This is to safeguard your system.

## Writing expressions using JSON

> Let's see how to extract data from the following sample Execution JSON: 

Author: @sahilhindwani-harness need details on how a user can obtain the execution JSON.

  }
}
```

You can retrieve specific chunks of data from the sample JSON above by locating the corresponding path. For example, to access the status of a combination within the matrix named `cStage1`, use the following expression: 

`pipeline.stages.cStage.cStage_0.status`

You can easily determine the complete expression for any desired data by traversing the JSON. 

Here are a few considerations to keep in mind when constructing such expressions. By following these guidelines, you can easily construct expressions to fetch the desired JSON data without using complex and lengthy paths.

* The full path, starting from the `pipeline` always works as a reference point.
* Fields like `stepInputs` and `outcome` can be ignored when constructing the full path.
* Relative paths can also be used by identifying the common parent between the step or stage you want to refer and the step or stage where the reference is made.
* Begin the expression from the common parent. For example, in the given expression, if you want to refer to the status of `CStage_0` from `CStage_1`, use the expression, `cStage.cStage_0.status`. This approach allows you to avoid constructing the full name each time.

> ## Writing complex expressions using JQ

Author: ```suggestion
### Writing complex expressions using JQ
```

JQ is a lightweight, powerful command-line tool specifically designed for JSON processing in Bash. It provides a wide range of features for querying, filtering, and transforming JSON data. JQ can be easily integrated into Bash scripts and can be used to extract specific values or perform complex JSON operations.

Make sure that the following requirements are met to use JQ: 

> * Your Harness Delegate should support JQ if you are using a shell script step. For more details, go to [How to install JQ on Ubuntu](https://www.golinuxcloud.com/ubuntu-install-jq/).

Author: @sahilhindwani-harness need the INIT script for delegate to install JQ.

* Comprehensive execution JSON: You can access the execution JSON for all stages or individual steps. This JSON contains detailed information about inputs and outputs for each step within the stage. This lets you analyze and troubleshoot workflows effectively and extract the required information easily.
* Flexible JSON parsing: You can utilize any JSON parsing tool of your choice. This gives you the freedom to parse the execution JSON based on your preferred methods and extract the necessary information as per your requirements.
* JEXL script support: Expression V2 introduces support for JEXL scripts within Harness. This enhancement enables you to leverage the full power and flexibility of JEXL expressions, overcoming the limitations of the previous framework. You can now write complex expressions and customize the evaluation process to meet specific needs.

## Limitations

Expressions v2 has the following limitation: 

* If your step inputs or parameters size is greater than 4 KB then it cannot be part of your expanded JSON. This is to safeguard our system.

## Understanding JSON and writing expressions

> Here's how the execution JSON looks like: 

Reviewer: "Let's take an example Execution JSON and see how to extract data from it."

                  "name": "ShellScript_1",
                  "timeout": "10m",
                  "type": "ShellScript",
                  "spec": {
                    "outputVariables": {},
                    "environmentVariables": {},
                    "secretOutputVariables": [],
                    "shell": "Bash",
                    "source": {
                      "type": "Inline",
                      "spec": {
                        "script": "t=\"[]\"\necho $t"
                      }
                    },
                    "onDelegate": true
                  },
                  "rollbackParameters": {
                    "strategy": "UNKNOWN",
                    "strategyToUuid": {
                      "STAGE_ROLLBACK": "A31KTBUdTja1KanfnDrtGQ_combinedRollback"
                    },
                    "applicableFailureTypes": []
                  }
                },
                "status": "SUCCEEDED",
                "outcome": {
                  "output": {
                    "outputVariables": {}
                  }
                }
              }
            }
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

> Retrieve specific chunks of data in the above JSON by locating the corresponding path. For instance, to access the status of a combination within the matrix named cStage1, use the following expression: 

Reviewer: We can retrieve specific chunks of data from the above JSON by locating the corresponding path.

          execution:
            steps:
              - step:
                  type: ShellScript
                  name: ShellScript_1
                  identifier: ShellScript_1
                  timeout: 10m
                  spec:
                    shell: Bash
                    onDelegate: true
                    source:
                      type: Inline
                      spec:
                        script: |
                          echo "My number is: <+strategy.iteration>"
                    environmentVariables: []
                    outputVariables: []
        tags: {}
        when:
          pipelineStatus: All
        strategy:
          matrix:
            name:
              - john
              - doe
              - nick
        tags: {}

```
### Writing expressions using JQ

JQ is a lightweight, powerful command-line tool specifically designed for JSON processing in Bash. It provides a wide range of features for querying, filtering, and transforming JSON data. JQ can be easily integrated into Bash scripts and can be used to extract specific values or perform complex JSON operations.

Make sure that the following requirements are met to use JQ: 

> * Your Harness Delegate should support JQ if you are using a shell script step.

Reviewer: Instead of "Support JQ", we should be saying "should have JQ installed"

#### Fetch the status of all combinations of stage named `stageWithMatrix`

Use the following expression to fetch the status of all combinations of stage named `stageWithMatrix`:

```
t='<+json.format(<+pipeline.stages.stageWithMatrix>)>'
echo $t | jq '(. | to_entries[] | select(.key | startswith("stageWithMatrix")) |  .value.status)'
```
#### Fetch the status of all identifiers of a step in a stage named `stageWithMatrix`

Use the following expression to fetch the status of all identifiers of a step in a stage named `stageWithMatrix`: 

```
t='<+json.format(<+pipeline.stages.stageWithMatrix>)>'
echo $t | jq '(. | to_entries[] | select(.key | startswith("stageWithMatrix")) | .value.spec.execution.steps | keys[] |  select(.| IN("status", "stepInputs")| not))'
```

#### Fetch the status of all combinations of a step named `ShellScript_1`

Use the following expression to fetch the status of all combinations of a step named `ShellScript_1`:

```
t='<+json.format(<+pipeline.stages.stepWithMatrix.spec.execution.steps.ShellScript_1>)>'
echo $t | jq '(. | to_entries[] | select(.key | startswith("ShellScript_1")) | .value.status)'
```

### Writing expressions using JEXL

> By introducing script support, Harness enables you to define functions, utilize loops, and incorporate if conditions within your expressions. This expanded functionality empowers you to handle more complex logic and perform advanced operations.

Reviewer: How to have JEXL Script support on the delegate? @sahilhindwani-harness

Author: Added a link to install JQ

---
title: Writing expressions using any JSON parser tool
description: Learn about the enhanced expressions experience using any JSON parser tool.
sidebar_position: 4
---

> To provide the best experience for customers when using expressions, Harness has introduced support for writing expressions by using any JSON parser tool. With this enhancement, we are effectively addressing customer concerns and providing them with a more user-friendly and adaptable expression engine. These improvements enhance the overall user experience, increase productivity, and empower customers to have greater control and customization capabilities in their evaluation processes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To provide you with the best experience when using expressions, Harness has introduced support for writing expressions by using any JSON parser tool. With this enhancement, Harness effectively addresses customer concerns and provides a more user-friendly and adaptable expression engine. These improvements enhance the overall user experience, increase productivity, and empower you to have greater control and customization capabilities in your evaluation processes.
```
